---
title: Usable Formal Methods Research Group Sample Problems
abbrev: UFM Sample
docname: draft-farrell-ufmrg-sample-00
category: info
submissionType: IRTF

ipr: trust200902
keyword: Internet-Draft

pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: S. Farrell
    name: Stephen Farrell
    org: Trinity College, Dublin
    country: Ireland
    email: stephen.farrell@cs.tcd.ie

normative:

informative:
    ufmrg:
        title: Usable Formal Methods Research Group
        target: https://datatracker.ietf.org/rg/ufmrg/about/
        author:
            organization: IRTF
        date: 2023
    ufmrg-interim:
        title: May 2023 UFMRG online Interim meeting
        target: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/minutes-interim-2023-ufmrg-01-202305241500/
        author:
            organization: IRTF
        date: 2023

--- abstract

This draft provides reasoning as to why the Usable Formal Methods research
group might benefit from having an IETF-relevant sample problem and describes
one such (IMAP search). This is just an initial draft aiming to help move
discussion forward so may be dropped or replaced by other drafts or the
research group may prefer some non I-D format, or the research group may decide
that sample problems aren't sufficiently useful. Early days, basically!  

--- middle

Introduction
============

The Usable Formal Methods research group {{ufmrg}} has discussed the idea
that having one or more "sample" problems might be useful for a number of
reasons:

- to provide a small but realistic IETF-relevant problem with which proponents
  of particular formal methods can demonstrate their preferred methodologies
- to produce relatively simple formal methods artefacts that deal with a
  problem familiar to many IETF participants
- to allow for comparison between formal methods artefacts so that IETF
  participants can better understand which mechanisms are best used when
- to possibly discover something new about the sample problems or about
  implementations of those

The hope is that this should help both sets of people better understand how
formal methods may be useful for IETF work.

We posit that the following characteristics will help us identify one or
more "good" sample problems:

- the problem should be well-understood by many IETF participants and easy
  to understand for formal methods people seeing the problem description for
  the first time
- the problem should be simple, so that the formal methods artefacts produced
  don't overwhelm IETF participants and to lower the effort required for 
  formal methods people to demonstrate how their preferred mechanisms work
  for that problem

We provide an initial description of one such problem in the section 2.
If additional sample problems are proposed, those could be documented in
other sections of this draft or in other documents. (To be clear: the 
author would welcome such text - the more the merrier for now.)

## Success Criteria

If this approach succeeds we would expect:

- to see formal methods proponents publish analyses of the sample problem(s)
- to see IETF participants use/reference those analyses
- to eventually see teams of IETF participants (with implementation/deployment
  experience) work together with proponents of formal method schemes to extend
  those analyses

If this approach doesn't get traction, we will most likely hear crickets.

## Discussion Venues

The github repo for this draft is at:

    https://github.com/sftcd/ufmrg-sample

PRs, issues etc are welcome. Substantive discussion however should for now at
least be directed to the UFMRG mailing list: ufmrg@irtf.org 

IMAP Search
===========

## Background

UFMRG recently {{ufmrg-interim}} discussed the idea of using IMAP search as
a sample problem. The reasons for considering this include:

- IMAP is familiar to all concerned, and doesn't require specialist 
  cryptographic understanding
- IMAP search is widely used, apparently particularly by mobile device mail
  user agents (MUAs)
- IMAP search has some complexity, e.g. working for connections from multiple
  MUAs at  the same time, and with some statefullness
- a description of IMAP search may be relatively easy to extract from the
  relevant RFCs (I'm about to find out if that's true:-)

The basic problem here is for an MUA to provide search criteria to a 
message store (MS) and to be returned information about the set of 
email messages that match the search criteria. Further IMAP operations
may be performed on the search results, e.g. to move all matching 
messages to another folder. A typical mail account will be used by
multiple MUAs in parallel, so that the same person may be searching,
moving or deleting from a mobile MUA and a desktop MUA at the same
time, possibly leading to interesting implementation or protocol
failure cases.

## Underlying Specifications

IMAP search is primarily defined in {{?RFC9051}}, section 6.4.4 but with some
additional ABNF definitions defined elsewhere required. We reproduce relevant
text in the next section. For simplicity, we omit some of the possible
search criteria in the description below.

The text below is a verbatim copy of the text version of RFC9051, section
6.4.4.  Future versions of this draft will likely simplify this text, and we'll
try find a better way to include snippets of RFC text. We've not yet
included the references from that text. 

For now, the purpose of this text is really to try help figure out what kind of
sample problem description might be useful, so this is not yet intended to be
something that could be used to generate a formal analysis of the IMAP search
command.

## Text from RFC 9051

BEGIN TEXT FROM 9051

~~~~~~~~~~
{::include 9051-6.4.4.txt}
~~~~~~~~~~

END TEXT FROM 9051

Acknowledgments
===============

TBD

Security Considerations
=======================

The security properties of the sample problem(s) are of course of interest
but this draft itself will hopefully introduce no new security considerations
unless we omit something from the description of the sample problem(s) that
leads to erroneous conclusions about those security properties.

IANA Considerations
===================

No changes to IANA processes are made by this memo.

--- back

Changes from Earlier Versions
=============================

RFC editor: please remove this section.

Draft -00:

  * Initial revision
